src/pages/build/capabilities.md, before:

---
title: "Capabilities"
---

::: intro
Access to zome functions is secured by **capability-based security**. Holochain extends this concept by adding the ability to restrict access to a given set of callers.
:::

## Capability-based security, updated for agent-centric applications

Traditional [capability-based security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capability-based_security) works on a simple concept: the owner of a resource grants access to other processes by giving out a handle to the resource rather than direct access to it. (Usually in a client/server system, the handle is an authorization secret such as an [OAuth2 token](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-oauth-2).) Thus they can control the way the resource is used without needing to deal with access control lists or other access control methods. When the owner no longer wants the process to access the resource, they invalidate the handle.

Holochain extends this concept for zome calls, first by requiring that the payload of every call be signed by a private key. Let's take a look at the [`CapAccess` enum](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/enum.CapAccess.html) which defines the kinds of **capability grant** you can use in your hApp:

* `CapAccess::Unrestricted`: any signing key can access the function(s) covered by the capability.
* `CapAccess::Transferable`: any caller who possesses the secret can access the function(s). This is identical to traditional capability-based security.
* `CapAccess::Assigned`: a caller must possess the secret _and_ sign the call with a known key.

If the caller has the same key pair as the agent that owns the cell being called --- that is, another cell in the same hApp or a UI bundled with the hApp --- they can call any function without an explicit capability grant.

## Create a capability grant

An agent generates a capability by storing a [`CapGrantEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapGrantEntry.html) system entry on their source chain using the [`create_cap_grant`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_grant.html) host function.

!!! info Capabilities have to be created in every cell
A cell's zome functions aren't accessible to anyone except the author until the agent creates capability grants for them. Capabilities _only cover one cell_ in a hApp.
!!!

### Unrestricted

A hApp might want certain zome functions on an agent's device to be accessible to any caller without a secret. This sort of grant often gets set up in the [`init` callback](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-an-init-callback) so it's ready to go when agents need it.

The classic example is the [`recv_remote_signal` callback](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-recv-remote-signal-callback), which needs an unrestricted capability in order for the corresponding [`send_remote_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.send_remote_signal.html) host function to succeed.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn init() -> ExternResult<InitCallbackResult> {
    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "recv_remote_signal".into()));
    create_cap_grant(CapGrantEntry {
        tag: "remote_signals".into(),
        access: CapAccess::Unrestricted,
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    })?;
    Ok(InitCallbackResult::Pass)
}
```

### Transferrable

Sometimes you want to selectively grant access to a function but don't want to restrict the number of agents that can exercise the capability. This is useful when a person has multiple devices (and hence multiple agent IDs), or when there's a bot or background process whose signing key at call time is rotated on an unknown schedule.

This example creates a capability grant for some zome functions that create, update, or delete the [`Movie` and `Director` entries defined in the Entries page](/build/entries/).

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn approve_delegate_author_request(reason: String) -> ExternResult<CapSecret> {
    // Use this host call to generate a sufficiently random secret.
    let secret = generate_cap_secret()?;

    // Create the list of functions to grant access to.
    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "update_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "delete_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_director".into()));

    // Now write the cap grant.
    let cap_grant = CapGrantEntry {
        // Keep a memo of why we're creating this capability grant.
        // This makes it possible to audit and revoke it later.
        tag: format!("delegate_author_reason_{}", reason).into(),
        access: CapAccess::Transferable { secret },
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    };
    create_cap_grant(cap_grant)?;

    // Return the secret so the grantor can send it to the requestor.
    Ok(secret)
}
```

### Assigned

If you're concerned about capability secrets being leaked, you can bind a secret to one or more public keys. The zome call's provenance must match one of these public keys, and the payload signature must be valid for the provenance. This function rewrites `approve_delegate_author_request` to create an assigned grant.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct DelegateAuthorRequest {
    requestor: AgentPubKey,
    reason: String,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn approve_delegate_author_request(input: DelegateAuthorRequest) -> ExternResult<CapSecret> {
    let secret = generate_cap_secret()?;

    // Create the list of agents to give access to.
    let mut assignees = BTreeSet::new();
    assignees.insert(input.requestor.clone());

    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "update_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "delete_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_director".into()));

    let cap_grant = CapGrantEntry {
        tag: format!("delegate_author_reason_{}", input.reason).into(),
        access: CapAccess::Assigned {
            secret,
            assignees,
        },
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    };
    create_cap_grant(cap_grant)?;

    Ok(secret)
}
```

## Store a capability claim

Once an has gotten a capability secret from a grantor, they need to store it as a [`CapClaim`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapClaim.html) entry with the [`create_cap_claim`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_claim.html) host function so they can use it later when they want to call the functions they've been granted access to.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct DelegateAuthorApproval {
    grantor: AgentPubKey,
    secret: CapSecret,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn store_delegate_author_approval(input: DelegateAuthorApproval) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let cap_claim = CapClaimEntry {
        // When the agent wants to use this capability, they'll want
        // to be able to query their source chain for it by tag.
        tag: format!("delegate_author"),
        grantor: input.grantor,
        secret: input.secret,
    };
    create_cap_claim(cap_claim)
}
```

## Use a capability secret

To exercise a capability they've been granted, the agent needs to retrieve the claim from their source chain using the [`query`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/chain/fn.query.html) host function and supply the secret along with the zome call.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;
use movies_integrity::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct CreateMovieDelegateInput {
    movie: Movie,
    author_to_delegate_to: AgentPubKey,
}

pub fn create_movie_delegate(input: CreateMovieDelegateInput) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let CreateMovieDelegateInput { movie, author_to_delegate_to } = input;

    // Search the source chain for a capability claim of the right type and
    // author.
    let filter = ChainQueryFilter::new()
        // Capability claims are stored as entries.
        .action_type(ActionType::Create)
        .entry_type(EntryType::CapClaim)
        .include_entries(true);
    let maybe_matching_claim = query(filter)?
        .into_iter()
        .find_map(|r| {
            // It's safe to unwrap here because we only asked for records that
            // create cap claim entries.
            if let Entry::CapClaim(claim) = r.entry().as_option().unwrap() {
                if claim.tag == "delegate_author"
                    && claim.grantor == author_to_delegate_to {
                    // We've found the right claim!
                    return Some(claim.clone());
                } else {
                    return None;
                }
            }
            None
        });

    match maybe_matching_claim {
        Some(claim) => {
            // Use the claim in the remote zome call.
            let response = call_remote(
                claim.grantor.clone(),
                zome_info()?.name,
                "create_movie".into(),
                Some(claim.secret),
                movie,
            )?;

            match response {
                ZomeCallResponse::Ok(data) => data.decode().map_err(|e| wasm_error!("Couldn't deserialize response from remote agent: {}", e)),
                ZomeCallResponse::Unauthorized(_, _, _, _, _) => Err(wasm_error!("Agent {} won't let us create a movie through them", claim.grantor)),
                _ => Err(wasm_error!("Something unexpected happened")),
            }
        }
        _ => Err(wasm_error!("Couldn't find delegate author capability for {}", author_to_delegate_to)),
    }
}
```

## Reference

* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapAccess`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/enum.CapAccess.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapGrantEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapGrantEntry.html)
* [`hdk::capability::create_cap_grant`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_grant.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapClaim`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapClaim.html)
* [`hdk::capability::create_cap_claim`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_claim.html)
* [`hdk::chain::query`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/chain/fn.query.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::entry::Entry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/entry/enum.Entry.html) (`CapClaim` and `CapGrant` variants)
* [`hdk::p2p::call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::call_remote`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call_remote.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::emit_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.emit_signal.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::send_remote_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.send_remote_signal.html)

## Further reading

* [Core Concepts: Calls and Capabilities](/concepts/8_calls_capabilities/)
* Build Guide: Callbacks and Lifecycle Hooks: [`init`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-an-init-callback), [`recv_remote_signal`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-recv-remote-signal-callback), and [`post_commit`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-post-commit-callback) callbacks
*

Commit message:

edit: don't try so hard to make HC's capabilities line up with actual capabilities

src/pages/build/capabilities.md, after:

---
title: "Capabilities"
---

::: intro
Access to zome functions is secured by **capability-based security**, allowing agents to grant and revoke access to specific external agents (local front ends and remote peers) for specific coordinator zome functions. Your app implements this functionality by writing **capability grant, delete, and claim actions** to the agent's source chain.
:::

## Capability-based security, updated for agent-centric applications

Holochain secures zome function calls by creating and deleting `CapGrantEntry` records on an agent's source chain. These are then compared against the public key of a function caller (every function call must be signed by a private key). There are three levels of access to choose from; let's take a look at the [`CapAccess` enum](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/enum.CapAccess.html) which defines the kinds of **capability grant** you can use in your hApp:

* `CapAccess::Unrestricted`: any caller can access the function(s) covered by the capability.
* `CapAccess::Transferable`: any caller who possesses the secret can access the function(s). This gives moderate security; it's impossible to control who the possessor of a secret shares it with.
* `CapAccess::Assigned`: a caller must possess the secret _and_ sign the call with an authorized key. If you've used capability systems before, this is the closest to a true capability.

If the caller has the same key pair as the agent that owns the cell being called --- that is, another cell in the same hApp or a UI bundled with the hApp --- they can call any function without an explicit capability grant.

## Create a capability grant

An agent generates a capability by storing a [`CapGrantEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapGrantEntry.html) system entry on their source chain using the [`create_cap_grant`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_grant.html) host function.

!!! info Capabilities have to be created in every cell
A cell's zome functions aren't accessible to anyone except the author until the agent creates capability grants for them. A capability _only cover one cell_ in a hApp.
!!!

### Unrestricted

A hApp might want certain zome functions on an agent's device to be accessible to any caller without a secret. You can create an **unrestricted grant** for this.

The classic example is the [`recv_remote_signal` callback](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-recv-remote-signal-callback), which needs an unrestricted grant in order for the corresponding [`send_remote_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.send_remote_signal.html) host function to succeed. Here, we're setting it up in the `init` callback so it's ready to go on cell startup.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn init() -> ExternResult<InitCallbackResult> {
    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "recv_remote_signal".into()));
    create_cap_grant(CapGrantEntry {
        tag: "remote_signals".into(),
        access: CapAccess::Unrestricted,
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    })?;
    Ok(InitCallbackResult::Pass)
}
```

### Transferrable

A **transferrable grant** requires that a caller supply a secret in order to exercise it. The secret can be leaked by anyone the grantor gives it to, and should be considered minimal security.

This example creates a capability grant for some zome functions that create, update, or delete the [`Movie` and `Director` entries defined in the Entries page](/build/entries/).

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn approve_delegate_author_request(reason: String) -> ExternResult<CapSecret> {
    // Use this host call to generate a sufficiently random secret.
    let secret = generate_cap_secret()?;

    // Create the list of functions to grant access to.
    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "update_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "delete_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_director".into()));

    // Now write the cap grant.
    let cap_grant = CapGrantEntry {
        // Keep a memo of why we're creating this capability grant.
        // This makes it possible to audit and revoke it later.
        tag: format!("delegate_author_reason_{}", reason).into(),
        access: CapAccess::Transferable { secret },
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    };
    create_cap_grant(cap_grant)?;

    // Return the secret so the grantor can send it to the requestor.
    Ok(secret)
}
```

### Assigned

An **assigned grant** lets you bind a capability to one or more authorized public keys, which prevents unauthorized use if the secret gets leaked. This function rewrites `approve_delegate_author_request` to create an assigned grant.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct DelegateAuthorRequest {
    requestor: AgentPubKey,
    reason: String,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn approve_delegate_author_request(input: DelegateAuthorRequest) -> ExternResult<CapSecret> {
    let secret = generate_cap_secret()?;

    // Create the list of agents to give access to.
    let mut assignees = BTreeSet::new();
    assignees.insert(input.requestor.clone());

    let mut functions = BTreeSet::new();
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "update_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "delete_movie".into()));
    functions.insert((zome_info()?.name, "create_director".into()));

    let cap_grant = CapGrantEntry {
        tag: format!("delegate_author_reason_{}", input.reason).into(),
        access: CapAccess::Assigned {
            secret,
            assignees,
        },
        functions: GrantedFunctions::Listed(functions),
    };
    create_cap_grant(cap_grant)?;

    Ok(secret)
}
```

## Store a capability claim

Once an agent has gotten a capability secret from a grantor, they need to store it as a [`CapClaim`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapClaim.html) entry with the [`create_cap_claim`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_claim.html) host function so they can use it later when they want to call the functions they've been granted access to.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct DelegateAuthorApproval {
    grantor: AgentPubKey,
    secret: CapSecret,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn store_delegate_author_approval(input: DelegateAuthorApproval) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let cap_claim = CapClaimEntry {
        // When the agent wants to use this capability, they'll want
        // to be able to query their source chain for it by tag.
        tag: format!("delegate_author"),
        grantor: input.grantor,
        secret: input.secret,
    };
    create_cap_claim(cap_claim)
}
```

## Use a capability

To exercise a capability they've been granted, an agent needs to retrieve the claim from their source chain using the [`query`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/chain/fn.query.html) host function and supply the secret along with the zome call.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;
use movies_integrity::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct CreateMovieDelegateInput {
    movie: Movie,
    author_to_delegate_to: AgentPubKey,
}

pub fn create_movie_delegate(input: CreateMovieDelegateInput) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let CreateMovieDelegateInput { movie, author_to_delegate_to } = input;

    // Search the source chain for a capability claim of the right type and
    // author.
    let filter = ChainQueryFilter::new()
        // Capability claims are stored as entries.
        .action_type(ActionType::Create)
        .entry_type(EntryType::CapClaim)
        .include_entries(true);
    let maybe_matching_claim = query(filter)?
        .into_iter()
        .find_map(|r| {
            // It's safe to unwrap here because we only asked for records that
            // create cap claim entries.
            if let Entry::CapClaim(claim) = r.entry().as_option().unwrap() {
                if claim.tag == "delegate_author"
                    && claim.grantor == author_to_delegate_to {
                    // We've found the right claim!
                    return Some(claim.clone());
                } else {
                    return None;
                }
            }
            None
        });

    match maybe_matching_claim {
        Some(claim) => {
            // Use the claim in the remote zome call.
            let response = call_remote(
                claim.grantor.clone(),
                zome_info()?.name,
                "create_movie".into(),
                Some(claim.secret),
                movie,
            )?;

            match response {
                ZomeCallResponse::Ok(data) => data.decode().map_err(|e| wasm_error!("Couldn't deserialize response from remote agent: {}", e)),
                ZomeCallResponse::Unauthorized(_, _, _, _, _) => Err(wasm_error!("Agent {} won't let us create a movie through them", claim.grantor)),
                _ => Err(wasm_error!("Something unexpected happened")),
            }
        }
        _ => Err(wasm_error!("Couldn't find delegate author capability for {}", author_to_delegate_to)),
    }
}
```

## Reference

* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapAccess`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/enum.CapAccess.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapGrantEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapGrantEntry.html)
* [`hdk::capability::create_cap_grant`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_grant.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::capability::CapClaim`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/capability/struct.CapClaim.html)
* [`hdk::capability::create_cap_claim`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/capability/fn.create_cap_claim.html)
* [`hdk::chain::query`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/chain/fn.query.html)
* [`holochain_integrity_types::entry::Entry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/entry/enum.Entry.html) (`CapClaim` and `CapGrant` variants)
* [`hdk::p2p::call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::call_remote`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call_remote.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::emit_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.emit_signal.html)
* [`hdk::p2p::send_remote_signal`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.send_remote_signal.html)

## Further reading

* [Core Concepts: Calls and Capabilities](/concepts/8_calls_capabilities/)
* Build Guide: Callbacks and Lifecycle Hooks: [`init`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-an-init-callback), [`recv_remote_signal`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-recv-remote-signal-callback), and [`post_commit`](/build/callbacks-and-lifecycle-hooks/#define-a-post-commit-callback) callbacks
*
