src/pages/build/cloning.md, before:

---
title: "Cloning"
---

::: intro
**Cloning** an existing [DNA](/build/dnas) creates a new DNA with its own independent network and instantiates a new cell from this DNA. You can optionally change the [DNA properties](/build/dnas/#use-dna-properties) when you clone.
:::

## Creating independent networks with the same rules

As we described in [DNAs](/build/dnas/), every DNA has its own network, keyed by the hash of all its [integrity zomes](/build/zomes/#integrity) and [DNA modifiers](/build/dnas/#integrity-section). Cloning allows you to change an existing DNA slightly, so that it executes the same integrity code but enjoys a separate [DHT database](/concepts/4_dht/) and membership from the original.

An agent creates a clone by choosing an existing DNA in a hApp, then calling a create-clone function from either the app API or the HDK, specifying at least one new [DNA modifier](/build/dnas/#integrity-section) to change its DHA hash. Then they have to share the modifier(s) with all other peers who want to join the network, so those peers can specify the exact same modifiers in order to create an identical clone with an identical DNA hash.

!!! info Creating vs joining a clone network
From the perspective of using the functions we talk about in the rest of this page, there's really no meaningful difference between _creating_ a network and _joining_ it. Agents 'become the network' together, simply by instantiating a cell from a DNA, discovering other agent cells with the same DNA hash, and beginning to communicate with each other.
!!!

Here are the three DNA modifiers and how to use them:

### Network seed

When all you want to do is create a new network space, simply specify a new **network seed**. It's an arbitrary string that serves no purpose but to change the DNA hash. You can think of it like a passcode to the network.

### DNA properties

The DNA properties are constants that your integrity and coordinator zomes [can access](/build/dnas/#use-dna-properties) to change their behavior. Because they can be used in validation logic, they affect the 'meaning' of your integrity code, which is why they affect the DNA hash (a network is defined by its validation logic).

You can specify DNA properties without specifying a network seed, but be aware that this doesn't guarantee a unique network space. If you're cloning in order to both modify DNA behavior _and_ create a 'private' network space, specify a unique network seed along with the DNA properties.

### Origin time <!-- TODO: remove when O.5 lands -->

While you can specify an **origin time** (the earliest valid timestamp for any DHT data), in practice this isn't necessary. Holochain will just use the origin time from the original DNA.

## Clone a DNA from a client

If you want to clone a DNA from the client side, use the [`AppWebsocket.prototype.createCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.createclonecell.md).

This example shows a function that creates or joins a chat room from a DNA whose role in the hApp manifest is named `chat`. It uses the `getHolochainClient` helper we [created in the Front End page](/build/connecting-a-front-end/#connect-to-a-happ-with-the-javascript-client).

!!! info
All these examples use the [`createHolochainClient` helper from the Connecting a Front End page](/build/connecting-a-front-end/#connect-to-a-happ-with-the-javascript-client).
!!!

```typescript
import type { NetworkSeed, ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";
import { AppWebsocket } from "@holochain/client";

async function createOrJoinChat(
    // A human-readable name. We can use this in the UI.
    // When we create the clone, we pass it to Holochain.
    // It's local to the agent and doesn't affect anything functional, so
    // different agents can give the same chat room clone a different name
    // and still be able to access the room.
    name: string,
    // If a network seed is supplied, it means we're joining an existing chat
    // and have been given the network seed by the chat's creator.
    network_seed?: NetworkSeed
): Promise<ClonedCell> {
    if (typeof network_seed == "undefined") {
        // If no network seed is passed to the function, it means we're
        // creating a new chat. Generate a unique, random network seed to
        // ensure that the network is independent from any others.
        network_seed = crypto.randomUUID();
    }

    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.createCloneCell({
        modifiers: { network_seed },
        name,
        role_name: "chat",
    });
}
```

## Clone a DNA from a coordinator zome

You can also clone a DNA from within your back end with the [`create_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.create_clone_cell.html) host function. You need to enable the `properties` feature in your zome's `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
[dependencies]
hdk = { workspace = true, features = ["properties"] }
```

This back-end example behaves the same as the front-end example in the previous section:

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct CreateOrJoinChatInput {
    pub name: String,
    pub network_seed: Option<NetworkSeed>,
    pub chat_dna_hash: DnaHash,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn create_or_join_chat(input: CreateOrJoinChatInput) -> ExternResult<ClonedCell> {
    let network_seed_bytes = input.network_seed
        .map(|s| s.as_bytes().to_vec())
        .unwrap_or(random_bytes(32)?.into_vec());

    let network_seed = std::str::from_utf8(&network_seed_bytes)
        .map_err(|e| wasm_error!(e.to_string()))?;

    let modifiers = DnaModifiersOpt::none()
        .with_network_seed(network_seed.into());

    let cell_id = CellId::new(input.chat_dna_hash, agent_info()?.agent_latest_pubkey);
    let create_clone_cell_input = CreateCloneCellInput {
        cell_id: cell_id,
        modifiers,
        membrane_proof: None,
        name: input.name.into(),
    };
    create_clone_cell(create_clone_cell_input)
}
```

!!! info The `create_clone_cell` host function requires the DNA hash and agent ID
Unlike the JS client's `createCloneCell` API method, the HDK's `create_clone_cell` host function can't refer to an existing DNA by its role name. Instead, you have to specify the DNA hash and agent ID of an existing cell. <!-- TODO: change this if holochain/holochain#4762 gets addressed --> Because it's impossible to get the DNA hash of another role in the hApp using the HDK, you need to either hard-code it in the coordinator zome (which is not recommended because it leads to [tight coupling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coupling_%28computer_programming%29#Disadvantages_of_tight_coupling)) or pass it in from the client. Here's a sample client-side function to get a DNA hash from a role name and pass it to the zome function we just defined:

```typescript
import { CellType, type NetworkSeed, type ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";

async function createOrJoinChat_zomeSide(name: string, network_seed?: NetworkSeed): Promise<ClonedCell> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    let appInfo = await client.appInfo();
    // The first cell filling a role uses the 'prototype' (unmodified) DNA.
    let chat_cell = appInfo.cell_info?.["chat"]?.[0];
    if (!chat_cell) {
        throw new Error("Couldn't find a cell with the role name 'chat'.");
    }
    // The cell info type has one property, keyed by the cell type. Right now
    // `Provisioned` is the only fully supported type for a prototype cell,
    // but this will guard against the future when other provisioning
    // strategies are fully supported.
    let chat_dna_hash = chat_cell[CellType.Provisioned]?.cell_id[0]
        ?? chat_cell[CellType.Stem]?.dna
        ?? chat_cell[CellType.Cloned]?.cell_id[0];

    // This is the zome function we defined in the last code block.
    // Let's assume it's in a DNA whose role name is `chat_lobby`.
    return await client.callZome({
        role_name: "chat_lobby",
        zome_name: "chat_lobby",
        fn_name: "create_or_join_chat",
        payload: {
            name,
            network_seed,
            chat_dna_hash,
        }
    });
}
```
!!!

## Get all the clones of a role

To get all the clones of a given DNA, use [`AppWebsocket.prototype.appInfo`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appclient.appinfo.md) and take a look at the return value's `cell_info` property, which is an object that maps roles to the cells belonging to those roles.

```typescript
import { CellType, type ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";

async function getChatCells(): Promise<Array<ClonedCell>> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    let appInfo = await client.appInfo();
    let chats = appInfo.cell_info["chat"];
    if (typeof chats == "undefined") {
        throw new Error("The 'chat' role isn't defined in this hApp.");
    }

    return chats
        .filter((cell) => CellType.Cloned in cell)
        .map((cell) => cell[CellType.Cloned]);
}
```

## Address a clone cell when calling a zome function

To use a clone cell, you can address it either by its new DNA hash or its **clone ID**, which is a concatenation of its role name and a **clone index**. This value is _local to the agent's hApp instance_ and is returned by the conductor when the cell has been cloned.

### In the client {#call-clone-from-client}

This example posts a message to a given chat. It assumes that any DNAs cloned from the `chat` role have a `chat` zome with a function called `post_message` that accepts a string and returns the message hash.

```typescript
import { ActionHash, DnaHash } from "@holochain/client";

async function postMessageByCloneIndex(index: Number, message: String): Promise<ActionHash> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.callZome({
        // A clone's role name is a concatenation of its parent's role name
        // and its clone index.
        role_name: `chat.${index}`,
        zome_name: "chat",
        fn_name: "post_message",
        payload: message,
    });
}

async function postMessageByDnaHash(dnaHash: DnaHash, message: String): Promise<ActionHash> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.callZome({
        // No need to require a full CellId to be passed; we know the agent
        // ID will be the same for the whole app.
        cell_id: [dnaHash, client.cachedAppInfo.agent_pub_key],
        zome_name: "chat",
        fn_name: "post_message",
        payload: message,
    });
}
```
<!-- TODO: update this if holochain/holochain#4772 is accepted and done -->

### In a coordinator zome {#call-clone-from-coordinator}

The HDK's [`call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html) host function takes roughly the same arguments. This example sends a recurring status message to a given chat, perhaps triggered by a client that runs on a schedule.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn send_status_message_to_chat_by_clone_index(index: u32) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    send_status_message(CallTargetCell::OtherRole(format!("chat.{}", index)))
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn send_status_message_to_chat_by_dna_hash(dna_hash: DnaHash) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    send_status_message(CallTargetCell::OtherCell(CellId::new(dna_hash, agent_info()?.agent_latest_pubkey)))
}

fn send_status_message(target: CallTargetCell) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let message = format!("The time is {} and I'm still running", sys_time()?);
    let response = call(
        target,
        "chat",
        "post_message".into(),
        None,
        message,
    )?;
    match response {
        ZomeCallResponse::Ok(payload) => payload.decode().map_err(|e| wasm_error!(e.to_string())),
        _ => Err(wasm_error!("Something unexpected happened: {}", response.to_string())),
    }
}
```

## Disable a clone cell

When an agent no longer wants to be part of a network, they can disable the clone. The cell remains in the database but stops responding to zome calls and peer-to-peer network traffic. The hApp can't delete clone cells (to prevent malicious or malformed zomes or front ends from deleting data), but Holochain will clean up data when a hApp is uninstalled.

### In the client {#disable-clone-from-client}

Use the [`AppWebsocket.prototype.disableCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.disableclonecell.md) method to disable a cell from a front end.

<!--TODO: The signature of disableCloneCell breaks in 0.5 -->

```typescript
import { DnaHash } from "@holochain/client";

async function pauseChatByCloneIndex(index: Number): Promise<void> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return client.disableCloneCell({
        clone_cell_id: `chat.${index}`
    });
}

async function pauseChatByDnaHash(dnaHash: DnaHash): Promise<void> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return client.disableCloneCell({
        clone_cell_id: dnaHash,
    });
}
```

### In a coordinator zome {#disable-clone-from-coordinator}

Use the [`disable_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.disable_clone_cell.html) host function to disable a cell from a coordinator zome within the same hApp.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn pause_chat_by_clone_index(index: u32) -> ExternResult<()> {
    let clone_role_name = format!("chat.{}", index);
    let input = DisableCloneCellInput {
        clone_cell_id: CloneCellId::CloneId(CloneId(clone_role_name)),
    };
    disable_clone_cell(input)
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn pause_chat_by_dna_hash(dna_hash: DnaHash) -> ExternResult<()> {
    let input = DisableCloneCellInput {
        clone_cell_id: CloneCellId::DnaHash(dna_hash),
    };
    disable_clone_cell(input)
}
```

## Reference

* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.createCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.createclonecell.md)
* [`hdk::clone::create_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.create_clone_cell.html)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.appInfo`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appclient.appinfo.md)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.callZome`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.callzome.md)
* [`hdk::p2p::call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.disableCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.disableclonecell.md)
* [`hdk::clone::disable_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.disable_clone_cell.html)

## Further reading

* [Build Guide: hApps: `clone_limit`](/build/happs/#clone-limit)
* [Build Guide: DNAs: Single vs multiple DNAs](/build/dnas/#single-vs-multiple-dnas)

Commit message:

edit: improve language about network clashes

src/pages/build/cloning.md, after:

---
title: "Cloning"
---

::: intro
**Cloning** an existing [DNA](/build/dnas) creates a new DNA with its own independent network and instantiates a new cell from this DNA. You can optionally change the [DNA properties](/build/dnas/#use-dna-properties) when you clone.
:::

## Creating independent networks with the same rules

As we described in [DNAs](/build/dnas/), every DNA has its own network, keyed by the hash of all its [integrity zomes](/build/zomes/#integrity) and [DNA modifiers](/build/dnas/#integrity-section). Cloning allows you to change an existing DNA slightly, so that it executes the same integrity code but enjoys a separate [DHT database](/concepts/4_dht/) and membership from the original.

An agent creates a clone by choosing an existing DNA in a hApp, then calling a create-clone function from either the app API or the HDK, specifying at least one new [DNA modifier](/build/dnas/#integrity-section) to change its DHA hash. Then they have to share the modifier(s) with all other peers who want to join the network, so those peers can specify the exact same modifiers in order to create an identical clone with an identical DNA hash.

!!! info Creating vs joining a clone network
From the perspective of using the functions we talk about in the rest of this page, there's really no meaningful difference between _creating_ a network and _joining_ it. Agents 'become the network' together, simply by instantiating a cell from a DNA, discovering other agent cells with the same DNA hash, and beginning to communicate with each other.
!!!

Here are the three DNA modifiers and how to use them:

### Network seed

When all you want to do is create a new network space, simply specify a new **network seed**. It's an arbitrary string that serves no purpose but to change the DNA hash. You can think of it like a passcode to the network.

### DNA properties

The DNA properties are constants that your integrity and coordinator zomes [can access](/build/dnas/#use-dna-properties) to change their behavior. Because they can be used in validation logic, they affect the 'meaning' of your integrity code, which is why they affect the DNA hash (a network is defined by its validation logic).

!!! info Network clashes
You can specify DNA properties without specifying a network seed, but be aware that any others who have happened to create a clone with the same properties will find you and your data in their network space, and you will find them and their data in yours. This is intended behavior, but it might not be desired behavior --- if you're cloning in order to both modify DNA behavior _and_ create a new network space without any existing members or data, specify a random network seed along with the DNA properties.
!!!

### Origin time <!-- TODO: remove when O.5 lands -->

While you can specify an **origin time** (the earliest valid timestamp for any DHT data), in practice this isn't necessary. Holochain will just use the origin time from the original DNA.

## Clone a DNA from a client

If you want to clone a DNA from the client side, use the [`AppWebsocket.prototype.createCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.createclonecell.md).

This example shows a function that creates or joins a chat room from a DNA whose role in the hApp manifest is named `chat`. It uses the `getHolochainClient` helper we [created in the Front End page](/build/connecting-a-front-end/#connect-to-a-happ-with-the-javascript-client).

!!! info
All these examples use the [`createHolochainClient` helper from the Connecting a Front End page](/build/connecting-a-front-end/#connect-to-a-happ-with-the-javascript-client).
!!!

```typescript
import type { NetworkSeed, ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";
import { AppWebsocket } from "@holochain/client";

async function createOrJoinChat(
    // A human-readable name. We can use this in the UI.
    // When we create the clone, we pass it to Holochain.
    // It's local to the agent and doesn't affect anything functional, so
    // different agents can give the same chat room clone a different name
    // and still be able to access the room.
    name: string,
    // If a network seed is supplied, it means we're joining an existing chat
    // and have been given the network seed by the chat's creator.
    network_seed?: NetworkSeed
): Promise<ClonedCell> {
    if (typeof network_seed == "undefined") {
        // If no network seed is passed to the function, it means we're
        // creating a new chat. Generate a unique, random network seed to
        // ensure that the network is independent from any others.
        network_seed = crypto.randomUUID();
    }

    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.createCloneCell({
        modifiers: { network_seed },
        name,
        role_name: "chat",
    });
}
```

## Clone a DNA from a coordinator zome

You can also clone a DNA from within your back end with the [`create_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.create_clone_cell.html) host function. You need to enable the `properties` feature in your zome's `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
[dependencies]
hdk = { workspace = true, features = ["properties"] }
```

This back-end example behaves the same as the front-end example in the previous section:

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize, Debug)]
pub struct CreateOrJoinChatInput {
    pub name: String,
    pub network_seed: Option<NetworkSeed>,
    pub chat_dna_hash: DnaHash,
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn create_or_join_chat(input: CreateOrJoinChatInput) -> ExternResult<ClonedCell> {
    let network_seed_bytes = input.network_seed
        .map(|s| s.as_bytes().to_vec())
        .unwrap_or(random_bytes(32)?.into_vec());

    let network_seed = std::str::from_utf8(&network_seed_bytes)
        .map_err(|e| wasm_error!(e.to_string()))?;

    let modifiers = DnaModifiersOpt::none()
        .with_network_seed(network_seed.into());

    let cell_id = CellId::new(input.chat_dna_hash, agent_info()?.agent_latest_pubkey);
    let create_clone_cell_input = CreateCloneCellInput {
        cell_id: cell_id,
        modifiers,
        membrane_proof: None,
        name: input.name.into(),
    };
    create_clone_cell(create_clone_cell_input)
}
```

!!! info The `create_clone_cell` host function requires the DNA hash and agent ID
Unlike the JS client's `createCloneCell` API method, the HDK's `create_clone_cell` host function can't refer to an existing DNA by its role name. Instead, you have to specify the DNA hash and agent ID of an existing cell. <!-- TODO: change this if holochain/holochain#4762 gets addressed --> Because it's impossible to get the DNA hash of another role in the hApp using the HDK, you need to either hard-code it in the coordinator zome (which is not recommended because it leads to [tight coupling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coupling_%28computer_programming%29#Disadvantages_of_tight_coupling)) or pass it in from the client. Here's a sample client-side function to get a DNA hash from a role name and pass it to the zome function we just defined:

```typescript
import { CellType, type NetworkSeed, type ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";

async function createOrJoinChat_zomeSide(name: string, network_seed?: NetworkSeed): Promise<ClonedCell> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    let appInfo = await client.appInfo();
    // The first cell filling a role uses the 'prototype' (unmodified) DNA.
    let chat_cell = appInfo.cell_info?.["chat"]?.[0];
    if (!chat_cell) {
        throw new Error("Couldn't find a cell with the role name 'chat'.");
    }
    // The cell info type has one property, keyed by the cell type. Right now
    // `Provisioned` is the only fully supported type for a prototype cell,
    // but this will guard against the future when other provisioning
    // strategies are fully supported.
    let chat_dna_hash = chat_cell[CellType.Provisioned]?.cell_id[0]
        ?? chat_cell[CellType.Stem]?.dna
        ?? chat_cell[CellType.Cloned]?.cell_id[0];

    // This is the zome function we defined in the last code block.
    // Let's assume it's in a DNA whose role name is `chat_lobby`.
    return await client.callZome({
        role_name: "chat_lobby",
        zome_name: "chat_lobby",
        fn_name: "create_or_join_chat",
        payload: {
            name,
            network_seed,
            chat_dna_hash,
        }
    });
}
```
!!!

## Get all the clones of a role

To get all the clones of a given DNA, use [`AppWebsocket.prototype.appInfo`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appclient.appinfo.md) and take a look at the return value's `cell_info` property, which is an object that maps roles to the cells belonging to those roles.

```typescript
import { CellType, type ClonedCell } from "@holochain/client";

async function getChatCells(): Promise<Array<ClonedCell>> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    let appInfo = await client.appInfo();
    let chats = appInfo.cell_info["chat"];
    if (typeof chats == "undefined") {
        throw new Error("The 'chat' role isn't defined in this hApp.");
    }

    return chats
        .filter((cell) => CellType.Cloned in cell)
        .map((cell) => cell[CellType.Cloned]);
}
```

## Address a clone cell when calling a zome function

To use a clone cell, you can address it either by its new DNA hash or its **clone ID**, which is a concatenation of its role name and a **clone index**. This value is _local to the agent's hApp instance_ and is returned by the conductor when the cell has been cloned.

### In the client {#call-clone-from-client}

This example posts a message to a given chat. It assumes that any DNAs cloned from the `chat` role have a `chat` zome with a function called `post_message` that accepts a string and returns the message hash.

```typescript
import { ActionHash, DnaHash } from "@holochain/client";

async function postMessageByCloneIndex(index: Number, message: String): Promise<ActionHash> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.callZome({
        // A clone's role name is a concatenation of its parent's role name
        // and its clone index.
        role_name: `chat.${index}`,
        zome_name: "chat",
        fn_name: "post_message",
        payload: message,
    });
}

async function postMessageByDnaHash(dnaHash: DnaHash, message: String): Promise<ActionHash> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return await client.callZome({
        // No need to require a full CellId to be passed; we know the agent
        // ID will be the same for the whole app.
        cell_id: [dnaHash, client.cachedAppInfo.agent_pub_key],
        zome_name: "chat",
        fn_name: "post_message",
        payload: message,
    });
}
```
<!-- TODO: update this if holochain/holochain#4772 is accepted and done -->

### In a coordinator zome {#call-clone-from-coordinator}

The HDK's [`call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html) host function takes roughly the same arguments. This example sends a recurring status message to a given chat, perhaps triggered by a client that runs on a schedule.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn send_status_message_to_chat_by_clone_index(index: u32) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    send_status_message(CallTargetCell::OtherRole(format!("chat.{}", index)))
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn send_status_message_to_chat_by_dna_hash(dna_hash: DnaHash) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    send_status_message(CallTargetCell::OtherCell(CellId::new(dna_hash, agent_info()?.agent_latest_pubkey)))
}

fn send_status_message(target: CallTargetCell) -> ExternResult<ActionHash> {
    let message = format!("The time is {} and I'm still running", sys_time()?);
    let response = call(
        target,
        "chat",
        "post_message".into(),
        None,
        message,
    )?;
    match response {
        ZomeCallResponse::Ok(payload) => payload.decode().map_err(|e| wasm_error!(e.to_string())),
        _ => Err(wasm_error!("Something unexpected happened: {}", response.to_string())),
    }
}
```

## Disable a clone cell

When an agent no longer wants to be part of a network, they can disable the clone. The cell remains in the database but stops responding to zome calls and peer-to-peer network traffic. The hApp can't delete clone cells (to prevent malicious or malformed zomes or front ends from deleting data), but Holochain will clean up data when a hApp is uninstalled.

### In the client {#disable-clone-from-client}

Use the [`AppWebsocket.prototype.disableCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.disableclonecell.md) method to disable a cell from a front end.

<!--TODO: The signature of disableCloneCell breaks in 0.5 -->

```typescript
import { DnaHash } from "@holochain/client";

async function pauseChatByCloneIndex(index: Number): Promise<void> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return client.disableCloneCell({
        clone_cell_id: `chat.${index}`
    });
}

async function pauseChatByDnaHash(dnaHash: DnaHash): Promise<void> {
    let client = await getHolochainClient();
    return client.disableCloneCell({
        clone_cell_id: dnaHash,
    });
}
```

### In a coordinator zome {#disable-clone-from-coordinator}

Use the [`disable_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.disable_clone_cell.html) host function to disable a cell from a coordinator zome within the same hApp.

```rust
use hdk::prelude::*;

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn pause_chat_by_clone_index(index: u32) -> ExternResult<()> {
    let clone_role_name = format!("chat.{}", index);
    let input = DisableCloneCellInput {
        clone_cell_id: CloneCellId::CloneId(CloneId(clone_role_name)),
    };
    disable_clone_cell(input)
}

#[hdk_extern]
pub fn pause_chat_by_dna_hash(dna_hash: DnaHash) -> ExternResult<()> {
    let input = DisableCloneCellInput {
        clone_cell_id: CloneCellId::DnaHash(dna_hash),
    };
    disable_clone_cell(input)
}
```

## Reference

* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.createCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.createclonecell.md)
* [`hdk::clone::create_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.create_clone_cell.html)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.appInfo`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appclient.appinfo.md)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.callZome`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.callzome.md)
* [`hdk::p2p::call`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/p2p/fn.call.html)
* [`AppWebsocket.prototype.disableCloneCell`](https://github.com/holochain/holochain-client-js/blob/main/docs/client.appwebsocket.disableclonecell.md)
* [`hdk::clone::disable_clone_cell`](https://docs.rs/hdk/latest/hdk/clone/fn.disable_clone_cell.html)

## Further reading

* [Build Guide: hApps: `clone_limit`](/build/happs/#clone-limit)
* [Build Guide: DNAs: Single vs multiple DNAs](/build/dnas/#single-vs-multiple-dnas)
