src/pages/build/dht-operations.md, before:

---
title: "DHT operations"
---

::: intro
An agent receives **DHT operations**, which are requests for them to transform [their slice of the DHT](/concepts/4_dht/#finding-peers-and-data-in-a-distributed-database) in some way. A DHT operation must be validated before it's applied. For this reason it's the input parameter to the [`validate` callback](/build/validate-callback/).

:::

!!! info Validating actions instead of DHT operations
**This is an advanced topic.** Writing validation rules that checks DHT operations requires understanding Holochain's data model. Until you have a reason to write validation rules at this level of granularity, we recommend letting the [scaffolding tool](/get-started/3-forum-app-tutorial/) generate a `validate` callback for you, which calls out to [stub functions](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that validate the _actions_ that create, update, or delete your application's entry and link types, and makes opinionated but sensible choices about which groups of authorities should validate what portions of the op data. The following information is presented for people who have a specific need to further reduce overall validation overhead across the network.
!!!

## What is a DHT operation?

When an agent writes an [action](/build/working-with-data/#entries-actions-and-records-primary-data), its data gets added to the shared database by being transformed into multiple DHT operations which the author sends to various [**authorities**](/resources/glossary/#validation-authority) --- agents in the network who have taken responsibility to validate, store, and serve all data that belongs to a range of [**basis addresses**](/resources/glossary/#basis-address). Each operation represents a request to add the action data to the primary content or metadata stored at that address.

## Choosing validation tasks for operations

All the DHT operations for an action get stored at different basis addresses, and you're free to write different validation logic for each of them.

Writing good validation code means considering what effect an operation has on the DHT, and how it impacts those who end up validating it. DHT agents don't choose what types of operation they validate --- they simply [assume authority for a range of basis addresses](/concepts/4_dht/), and are expected to process whatever operations they receive.

It's usually okay to let the scaffolding tool decide how to break up the work. It contains sensible defaults that balances network integrity with performance. However, if your validation logic is computationally costly, or if you have higher security needs, you may want to write different validation logic for different operations.

As an example, you may choose to reduce compute demands by splitting up validation between `StoreRecord` and `StoreEntry` operations for a given entry creation action; the former could check the agent's write privileges while the latter could check the structure of the entry data or the existence of the data it references.

Or you may choose to increase data integrity by having authorities treat every operation the same and execute all the logic necessary to validate the action.

## How actions translate to DHT operations

Here are all the DHT operations produced for all the actions, along with their contents and the effect of applying them after validation.

* All actions
    * [`RegisterAgentActivity`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterAgentActivity)
        * Basis address: author's public key
        * Contents: action
        * System validation: Check for non-monotonic sequence indices and timestamps in adjacent actions, and detect [source chain forks](/resources/glossary/#fork-source-chain).
        * Effect: Append the action to a replica of the author's source chain.
    * [`StoreRecord`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.StoreRecord)
        * Basis address: action hash
        * Contents: action (and optionally entry, if applicable) <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Store the action, along with any entry data.
* [`Create`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Create)
    * [`StoreEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.StoreEntry)
        * Basis address: entry hash
        * Contents: entry, and the action that wrote it
        * System validation: Check that the action's entry hash matches the entry hash.
        * Effect: Store the entry, if an identical entry hasn't been created yet, and add the action to the the list of actions associated with its creation. An entry can be created by multiple authors, and each creation action paired with its entry [can be treated as an independent piece of data](/build/entries/#entries-and-actions). **This operation isn't produced for private entries.**
* [`Update`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Update)
    * `StoreEntry` (see above)
    * [`RegisterUpdate`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterUpdate)
        * Basis addresses: entry and action hashes of the _old_ entry being updated
        * Contents: action and entry <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark an entry creation action as being replaced by a new one, pointing the the entry and action that replace it. **An entry and its creation action can have multiple actions updating them.**
* [`Delete`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Delete)
    * [`RegisterDelete`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterDelete)
        * Basis addresses: entry and action hashes of the entry being deleted
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark an entry creation action as deleted, without removing the actual data. Because an entry can be created by multiple creation actions, the entry itself isn't marked as deleted until a `RegisterDelete` has been integrated for _all_ of its creation actions.
* [`CreateLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.CreateLink)
    * [`RegisterCreateLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterCreateLink)
        * Basis address: link's [base address](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/#define-a-link-type)
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Add a link to the list of links pointing from the base to other locations
* [`DeleteLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.DeleteLink)
    * [`RegisterDeleteLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterCreateLink)
        * Basis addresses: old link's [base address](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/#define-a-link-type) and action hash
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark a link as deleted, without removing the actual data.

Commit message:

edit: caveat about authority selection being audited

src/pages/build/dht-operations.md, after:

---
title: "DHT operations"
---

::: intro
An agent receives **DHT operations**, which are requests for them to transform [their slice of the DHT](/concepts/4_dht/#finding-peers-and-data-in-a-distributed-database) in some way. A DHT operation must be validated before it's applied. For this reason it's the input parameter to the [`validate` callback](/build/validate-callback/).

:::

!!! info Validating actions instead of DHT operations
**This is an advanced topic.** Writing validation rules that checks DHT operations requires understanding Holochain's data model. Until you have a reason to write validation rules at this level of granularity, we recommend letting the [scaffolding tool](/get-started/3-forum-app-tutorial/) generate a `validate` callback for you, which calls out to [stub functions](/build/validate-callback/#create-boilerplate-code-with-the-scaffolding-tool) that validate the _actions_ that create, update, or delete your application's entry and link types, and makes opinionated but sensible choices about which groups of authorities should validate what portions of the op data. The following information is presented for people who have a specific need to further reduce overall validation overhead across the network.
!!!

## What is a DHT operation?

When an agent writes an [action](/build/working-with-data/#entries-actions-and-records-primary-data), its data gets added to the shared database by being transformed into multiple DHT operations which the author sends to various [**authorities**](/resources/glossary/#validation-authority) --- agents in the network who have taken responsibility to validate, store, and serve all data that belongs to a range of [**basis addresses**](/resources/glossary/#basis-address). Each operation represents a request to add the action data to the primary content or metadata stored at that address.

## Choosing validation tasks for operations

All the DHT operations for an action get stored at different basis addresses, and you're free to write different validation logic for each of them.

Writing good validation code means considering what effect an operation has on the DHT, and how it impacts those who end up validating it. DHT agents don't choose what types of operation they validate --- they simply [assume authority for a range of basis addresses](/concepts/4_dht/), and are expected to process whatever operations they receive.

It's usually okay to let the scaffolding tool decide how to break up the work. It contains sensible defaults that balances network integrity with performance. However, if your validation logic is computationally costly, or if you have higher security needs, you may want to write different validation logic for different operations.

As an example, you may choose to reduce compute demands by splitting up validation between `StoreRecord` and `StoreEntry` operations for a given entry creation action; the former could check the agent's write privileges while the latter could check the structure of the entry data or the existence of the data it references.

Or you may choose to increase data integrity by having authorities treat every operation the same and execute all the logic necessary to validate the action.

## How actions translate to DHT operations

Here are all the DHT operations produced for all the actions, along with their contents and the effect of applying them after validation.

!!! info This behavior is under review
While the following info describes the way Holochain should work [as formally specified](https://www.holochain.org/documents/holochain-white-paper-2.0.pdf), it's currently being audited for fidelity to that spec. In the meantime, you may see behavior that differs slightly.
!!!

* All actions
    * [`RegisterAgentActivity`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterAgentActivity)
        * Basis address: author's public key
        * Contents: action
        * System validation: Check for non-monotonic sequence indices and timestamps in adjacent actions, and detect [source chain forks](/resources/glossary/#fork-source-chain).
        * Effect: Append the action to a replica of the author's source chain.
    * [`StoreRecord`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.StoreRecord)
        * Basis address: action hash
        * Contents: action (and optionally entry, if applicable) <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Store the action, along with any entry data.
* [`Create`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Create)
    * [`StoreEntry`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.StoreEntry)
        * Basis address: entry hash
        * Contents: entry, and the action that wrote it
        * System validation: Check that the action's entry hash matches the entry hash.
        * Effect: Store the entry, if an identical entry hasn't been created yet, and add the action to the the list of actions associated with its creation. An entry can be created by multiple authors, and each creation action paired with its entry [can be treated as an independent piece of data](/build/entries/#entries-and-actions). **This operation isn't produced for private entries.**
* [`Update`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Update)
    * `StoreEntry` (see above)
    * [`RegisterUpdate`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterUpdate)
        * Basis addresses: entry and action hashes of the _old_ entry being updated
        * Contents: action and entry <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark an entry creation action as being replaced by a new one, pointing the the entry and action that replace it. **An entry and its creation action can have multiple actions updating them.**
* [`Delete`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.Delete)
    * [`RegisterDelete`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterDelete)
        * Basis addresses: entry and action hashes of the entry being deleted
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark an entry creation action as deleted, without removing the actual data. Because an entry can be created by multiple creation actions, the entry itself isn't marked as deleted until a `RegisterDelete` has been integrated for _all_ of its creation actions.
* [`CreateLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.CreateLink)
    * [`RegisterCreateLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterCreateLink)
        * Basis address: link's [base address](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/#define-a-link-type)
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Add a link to the list of links pointing from the base to other locations
* [`DeleteLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/action/enum.Action.html#variant.DeleteLink)
    * [`RegisterDeleteLink`](https://docs.rs/holochain_integrity_types/latest/holochain_integrity_types/op/enum.Op.html#variant.RegisterCreateLink)
        * Basis addresses: old link's [base address](/build/links-paths-and-anchors/#define-a-link-type) and action hash
        * Contents: action <!--TODO: system validation? -->
        * Effect: Mark a link as deleted, without removing the actual data.
