src/pages/build/using-the-host-api.md, before:

---
title: "Using the Host API"
---

::: topic-list
### In this section {data-no-toc}

* Using the Host API (this page)
    * hApp introspection (coming soon) --- finding out info about the DNA, zome, and agent
    * Cryptography functions (coming soon) --- key generation, signatures, hashing, random numbers, and encryption
    * Miscellaneous host functions (coming soon) --- system time
:::

::: intro
Back-end code (**zomes**) interact with the outside world through Holochain's **host API**, which the **HDK** library makes accessible. It allows agents to read and write data, interact with other cells, and access various other host features.
:::

## Accessing the host

Holochain creates a **sandbox** for zomes to run in, so they can't access the host computer's functionality directly. It exposes a minimal interface for data access, introspection, peer-to-peer interactions, and interop between code modules. You use the HDK (or a minimal subset, the HDI library) to access the host API.

A lot of this is covered elsewhere already --- [Working with Data](/build/working-with-data/) and [Validation](/build/validation/) talk about data access functions, and [Connecting the Parts](/build/connecting-the-parts/) talks about interop.

There are a few other functions that don't fall into those categories, so we'll cover them in this section. They are **introspection**, **cryptography**, and **miscellaneous functions**.<!-- TODO: link as they're written -->

Commit message:

edit: note about host API, small text edit

src/pages/build/using-the-host-api.md, after:

---
title: "Using the Host API"
---

::: topic-list
### In this section {data-no-toc}

* Using the Host API (this page)
    * hApp introspection (coming soon) --- finding out info about the DNA, zome, and agent
    * Cryptography functions (coming soon) --- key generation, signatures, hashing, random numbers, and encryption
    * Miscellaneous host functions (coming soon) --- system time
:::

::: intro
Back-end code (**zomes**) interact with the outside world through Holochain's **host API**, which the **HDK** library makes accessible. It allows agents to read and write data, interact with other cells, and access various other host features.
:::

## Accessing the host

Holochain creates a **sandbox** for zomes to run in, so they can't access the host computer's functionality directly. It exposes a minimal interface for data access, introspection, peer-to-peer interactions, and interop between code modules. You use the HDK (or a minimal subset, the HDI library) to access the host API.

!!! info Holochain doesn't expose standard WASM host APIs
Holochain's host API is a small feature set written explicitly for interacting with Holochain's feature set. It doesn't include the WebAssembly JavaScript API or the WebAssembly System Interface (WASI).
!!!

A lot of this is covered elsewhere already --- [Working with Data](/build/working-with-data/) and [Validation](/build/validation/) talk about data access functions, and [Connecting the Parts](/build/connecting-the-parts/) talks about interop.

There are a few other functions that don't fall into those categories, so we'll cover them here in three categories: **introspection**, **cryptography**, and **miscellaneous functions**.<!-- TODO: link as they're written -->
