src/pages/get-started/distribute-your-app.md, before:

---
title: Distribute your App
---

## Packaging a Web-hApp archive

At some stage in the app development you'll want to deploy your hApp for others to use it. For this, you will need to package it into a `.webhapp` file that contains both the back-end and the front-end code of your hApp.

If you've created the hApp with the `hc scaffold` cli tool, all you need to do is:

```shell
npm run package
```

The app bundle ending in `.webhapp` will be available in the project root's `workdir` folder. Now you can deploy it to a place where users can download it or directly share it with peers you want to use it with.

To bundle manually and for extended details on Web-hApps, refer to the packaging steps in the [Github repo of the Holochain Launcher](https://github.com/holochain/launcher#packaging-a-web-happ).

## Installing the app using the Holochain Launcher

Holochain provides the Holochain Launcher, a graphical user interface, to install, run and administrate hApps. [Download Holochain Launcher](https://github.com/holochain/launcher/releases)

To publicly share your bundled hApp through the Holochain Launcher, follow the [instructions on how to publish it to the DevHub](https://github.com/holochain/launcher#publishing-and-updating-an-app-in-the-devhub) in the README of the Holochain Launcher.

Another option is to [install a hApp locally from an app bundle on the file system](https://github.com/holochain/launcher#installing-a-holochain-app-happ). Other users will need to obtain the bundled app file and install it to their Launcher.

Commit message:

Fix: re-enable external links checks (#600)
* chore: switch to self-maintained netlify-plugin-checklinks

* feat: use features of self-maintained check links plugin

* fix: use ZomeCallCapGrant -- favour non-aliased types

* fix: many links

* favour canonical entity URLs rather than ::prelude:: or re-exports
* try to simplify redirects
* fix things that are just plain broken
* some whitespace normalisation crept in here too

* chore: bump netlify-plugin-checklinks in attempt to fix flaky bug with timeouts

* fix: suggestions from the Rabbit

* fix: more suggestions from the Rabbit

* fix: more prelude links; I'm sure I fixed all these

src/pages/get-started/distribute-your-app.md, after:

---
title: Distribute your App
---

## Packaging a Web-hApp archive

At some stage in the app development you'll want to deploy your hApp for others to use it. For this, you will need to package it into a `.webhapp` file that contains both the back-end and the front-end code of your hApp.

If you've created the hApp with the `hc scaffold` cli tool, all you need to do is:

```shell
npm run package
```

The app bundle ending in `.webhapp` will be available in the project root's `workdir` folder. Now you can deploy it to a place where users can download it or directly share it with peers you want to use it with.

To bundle manually and for extended details on Web-hApps, refer to the packaging steps in the [Github repo of the Holochain Launcher](https://github.com/holochain/launcher?tab=readme-ov-file#developers).

## Installing the app using the Holochain Launcher

Holochain provides the Holochain Launcher, a graphical user interface, to install, run and administrate hApps. [Download Holochain Launcher](https://github.com/holochain/launcher/releases)

To publicly share your bundled hApp through the Holochain Launcher, follow the [instructions on how to publish it to the DevHub](https://github.com/holochain/launcher?tab=readme-ov-file#publish-an-app-to-launchers-app-store) in the README of the Holochain Launcher.

Another option is to distribute the app bundle via a website such as GitHub's releases page for your project. Other users will need to obtain the bundled app file and install it to their Launcher.
