src/pages/get-building/index.md, before:

---
title: Get Building
---

In Quick Start you installed Holochain and built a templated forum application. Here you will use the scaffolding tool to build your own application and learn the basic commands for using the scaffold.

!!! note Pre-requisite
Holochain installed as per [Quick Start](../quick-start/index)
!!!

## Scaffold a custom Holochain application

For this example we will scaffold the canonical example, a to-do hApp.

Run the holochain scaffolding tool by typing in your terminal:

```bash
nix run github:/holochain/holochain#hc-scaffold -- web-app
```

You should then see:

```text
? App name (no whitespaces):
```

Type our hApp's name using snake_casing: `super_todos`.
You should then see:

```text
? Choose UI framework: ›
❯ Vue
  Svelte
  Lit
```

Use the arrow keys to select a UI framework for your front-end and then press `<enter>`.

For this example choose `Svelte` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Do you want to set up the holonix development environment for this project? ›
❯ Yes (recommended)
  No
```

Choose `Yes` and press `<enter>`.

You should then see `Setting up nix development environment...` with some details of what is being added, followed by instructions of next steps for setting up the development environment for your hApp and continuing to scaffold more of its elements. Let's follow those instructions. First, enter the hApp project directory:

```bash
cd super_todos
```

Now fire up the nix development shell (which makes all scaffolding tools as well as the Holochain binaries directly available from the command-line) with:

```bash
nix develop
```

You should see:

```text
Holochain development shell spawned. Type exit to leave.
```

Finally we need to install the `npm` dependencies with:

```bash
npm install
```

Now let's continue scaffolding our happ by creating a new DNA using the scaffolding tool which is now directly available in the shell. Type:

```bash
hc scaffold dna
```

You should then see:

```text
? DNA name (snake_case):
```

Many hApps have just one DNA, so in this case you can just type: `todos`
You should then see:

```text
DNA "todos" scaffolded!
```

DNAs are [comprised of code modules](/concepts/2_application_architecture/), which we call zomes. A DNA should have at least two zomes, an *integrity zome* which declares your DNAs data structures and validation code, and a *coordinator zome* which contains, among other things, the API functions your UI will call to access your DNA.

Create your DNA's first zomes with:

```bash
hc scaffold zome
```

You should then see:

```text
? What do you want to scaffold? ›
❯ Integrity/coordinator zome-pair (recommended)
  Only an integrity zome
  Only a coordinator zome
```

Press `<enter>` to select `Integrity/coordinator zome-pair`.
You should then see:

```text
? Enter coordinator zome name (snake_case):
 (The integrity zome will automatically be named '{name of coordinator zome}_integrity')
```

Type in a name for the zome. In this case we can just use the same name as the DNA `todos`.
You should then see:

```bash
? Scaffold integrity zome in folder "dnas/todos/zomes/integrity/"? (y/n) ›
```

Press `y` (this option is for advanced users who may have set up a different folder structure).
You should then see:

```text
Integrity zome "todo_integrity" scaffolded!
? Scaffold coordinator zome in "dnas/todos/zomes/coordinator/"? (y/n) ›
```

Press `y` again.

You will then see `Coordinator zome "todos" scaffolded!` along with output from the intial downloading and setting up of the Holochain Rust HDK, followed by instructions for adding your first entry type.

Now we get to the really exciting part! In the next steps you will specify your data model, and the scaffolding tool will automatically add both zome and UI code to your hApp.

In our to-do hApp every to-do item is stored as an entry. So let's add new entry definitions with:

```bash
  hc scaffold entry-type
```

You should see:

```bash
✔ Entry type name (snake_case): ·
```

Enter the name `todo_item`.
You should then see:

```text
Which fields should the entry contain?

? Choose field type: ›
❯ String
  bool
  u32
  i32
  f32
  Timestamp
  ActionHash
  EntryHash
  AgentPubKey
  Option of...
  Vector of...
```

The scaffolding tool is smart about adding different data type fields to your entry. For our example we will just have a text field describing the to-do item. So press `<enter>` to select `String`.

You should see:

```text
? Field name: ›
```

Enter the name `description`.
You should then see:

```text
? Should this field be visible in the UI? (y/n) ›
```
Press `y`.
You should then see:

```text
? Choose widget to render this field: ›
❯ TextArea
  TextField
```

Press `<enter>` to choose a `TextArea` because we want the description to be able to be multi-lines.
You should then see:

```text
? Add another field to the entry? (y/n) ›
```

Press `n`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which CRUD functions should be scaffolded (SPACE to select/unselect, ENTER to continue)? ›
✔ Update
✔ Delete
```

The scaffolding tool can add zome and UI functions for updating and deleting entries. In the case of our to-do app we want to be able to do both, which is the default, so just press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Should a link from the original entry be created when this entry is updated? ›
❯ Yes (more storage cost but better read performance, recommended)
  No (less storage cost but worse read performance)
```

Because Holochain stores data in append-only [source chains](/concepts/3_source_chain/), updating requires choosing a strategy of how to find updated data. The scaffolding tool allows you to choose between two strategies, one where updates are only linked to the previous version, and one where there is also a link added to the original entry for each update. For this use case either strategy would work fine, so press `<enter>` to choose the default.
You should then see:

```text
Entry type "todo_item" scaffolded!
```

The final step is create a collection that can be used to render all of to-do items that users create.
To create a collection, type:

```bash
  hc scaffold collection
```

You should then see:

```text
Collection name (snake_case, eg. "all_posts"): ›
```

Enter `my_todos` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which type of collection should be scaffolded? ›
❯ Global (get all entries of the selected entry types)
  By author (get entries of the selected entry types that a given author has created)
```

Use the arrow key to select `By author` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which entry type should be collected? ›
❯ TodoItem
```
Press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
Collection "my_todos" scaffolded!
```

You have now scaffolded your first Holochain hApp. To see it in action type:

```bash
npm start
```

After some compilation time you should see a browser window opened with the playground (our live Holochain state inspector) running in it, followed by two windows (opened by the `hc-launch` tool). These windows simulate two separate agents running our application.

The windows should not be very exciting yet, because we haven't edited the hApp to use the generated UI elements, but what you see on the screen should be some hints on how to proceed.

So let's follow those hints:

1. Open the Svelte hApp file in `ui/src/App.svelte` and add two imports near the top, just below `<script lang="ts">`:

    ```typescript
    import MyTodos from './todos/todos/MyTodos.svelte';
    import CreateTodoItem from './todos/todos/CreateTodoItem.svelte';
    ```

2. Replace the "EDIT ME" text there with:

    ```html
    <CreateTodoItem></CreateTodoItem>
    <MyTodos author={client.myPubKey}></MyTodos>
    ```

Save the file, and you should see that the windows have been updated to show something that should look like this:

<img src="/assets/img/scaffolded_todos.png">

You now have a fully functional Holochain app up and running!

Next steps might include creating a collection of all to-do items, not just the ones you created, and adding a UI to see them. Enjoy and get building!

!!! learn Learn More →

- Find all the links to Rust docs, HDKs, and APIs in [References](/references/).
- Seeing strange language in these steps? Look up the words in the [Glossary](/references/glossary/).
- Go deep to understand how Holochain works in the [Core Concepts](/concepts/1_the_basics/).
!!!

Commit message:

edit(get-building): emphasize switch from browser to code editor (#394)

src/pages/get-building/index.md, after:

---
title: Get Building
---

In Quick Start you installed Holochain and built a templated forum application. Here you will use the scaffolding tool to build your own application and learn the basic commands for using the scaffold.

!!! note Pre-requisite
Holochain installed as per [Quick Start](../quick-start/index)
!!!

## Scaffold a custom Holochain application

For this example we will scaffold the canonical example, a to-do hApp.

Run the holochain scaffolding tool by typing in your terminal:

```bash
nix run github:/holochain/holochain#hc-scaffold -- web-app
```

You should then see:

```text
? App name (no whitespaces):
```

Type our hApp's name using snake_casing: `super_todos`.
You should then see:

```text
? Choose UI framework: ›
❯ Vue
  Svelte
  Lit
```

Use the arrow keys to select a UI framework for your front-end and then press `<enter>`.

For this example choose `Svelte` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Do you want to set up the holonix development environment for this project? ›
❯ Yes (recommended)
  No
```

Choose `Yes` and press `<enter>`.

You should then see `Setting up nix development environment...` with some details of what is being added, followed by instructions of next steps for setting up the development environment for your hApp and continuing to scaffold more of its elements. Let's follow those instructions. First, enter the hApp project directory:

```bash
cd super_todos
```

Now fire up the nix development shell (which makes all scaffolding tools as well as the Holochain binaries directly available from the command-line) with:

```bash
nix develop
```

You should see:

```text
Holochain development shell spawned. Type exit to leave.
```

Finally we need to install the `npm` dependencies with:

```bash
npm install
```

Now let's continue scaffolding our happ by creating a new DNA using the scaffolding tool which is now directly available in the shell. Type:

```bash
hc scaffold dna
```

You should then see:

```text
? DNA name (snake_case):
```

Many hApps have just one DNA, so in this case you can just type: `todos`
You should then see:

```text
DNA "todos" scaffolded!
```

DNAs are [comprised of code modules](/concepts/2_application_architecture/), which we call zomes. A DNA should have at least two zomes, an *integrity zome* which declares your DNAs data structures and validation code, and a *coordinator zome* which contains, among other things, the API functions your UI will call to access your DNA.

Create your DNA's first zomes with:

```bash
hc scaffold zome
```

You should then see:

```text
? What do you want to scaffold? ›
❯ Integrity/coordinator zome-pair (recommended)
  Only an integrity zome
  Only a coordinator zome
```

Press `<enter>` to select `Integrity/coordinator zome-pair`.
You should then see:

```text
? Enter coordinator zome name (snake_case):
 (The integrity zome will automatically be named '{name of coordinator zome}_integrity')
```

Type in a name for the zome. In this case we can just use the same name as the DNA `todos`.
You should then see:

```bash
? Scaffold integrity zome in folder "dnas/todos/zomes/integrity/"? (y/n) ›
```

Press `y` (this option is for advanced users who may have set up a different folder structure).
You should then see:

```text
Integrity zome "todo_integrity" scaffolded!
? Scaffold coordinator zome in "dnas/todos/zomes/coordinator/"? (y/n) ›
```

Press `y` again.

You will then see `Coordinator zome "todos" scaffolded!` along with output from the intial downloading and setting up of the Holochain Rust HDK, followed by instructions for adding your first entry type.

Now we get to the really exciting part! In the next steps you will specify your data model, and the scaffolding tool will automatically add both zome and UI code to your hApp.

In our to-do hApp every to-do item is stored as an entry. So let's add new entry definitions with:

```bash
  hc scaffold entry-type
```

You should see:

```bash
✔ Entry type name (snake_case): ·
```

Enter the name `todo_item`.
You should then see:

```text
Which fields should the entry contain?

? Choose field type: ›
❯ String
  bool
  u32
  i32
  f32
  Timestamp
  ActionHash
  EntryHash
  AgentPubKey
  Option of...
  Vector of...
```

The scaffolding tool is smart about adding different data type fields to your entry. For our example we will just have a text field describing the to-do item. So press `<enter>` to select `String`.

You should see:

```text
? Field name: ›
```

Enter the name `description`.
You should then see:

```text
? Should this field be visible in the UI? (y/n) ›
```
Press `y`.
You should then see:

```text
? Choose widget to render this field: ›
❯ TextArea
  TextField
```

Press `<enter>` to choose a `TextArea` because we want the description to be able to be multi-lines.
You should then see:

```text
? Add another field to the entry? (y/n) ›
```

Press `n`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which CRUD functions should be scaffolded (SPACE to select/unselect, ENTER to continue)? ›
✔ Update
✔ Delete
```

The scaffolding tool can add zome and UI functions for updating and deleting entries. In the case of our to-do app we want to be able to do both, which is the default, so just press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Should a link from the original entry be created when this entry is updated? ›
❯ Yes (more storage cost but better read performance, recommended)
  No (less storage cost but worse read performance)
```

Because Holochain stores data in append-only [source chains](/concepts/3_source_chain/), updating requires choosing a strategy of how to find updated data. The scaffolding tool allows you to choose between two strategies, one where updates are only linked to the previous version, and one where there is also a link added to the original entry for each update. For this use case either strategy would work fine, so press `<enter>` to choose the default.
You should then see:

```text
Entry type "todo_item" scaffolded!
```

The final step is create a collection that can be used to render all of to-do items that users create.
To create a collection, type:

```bash
  hc scaffold collection
```

You should then see:

```text
Collection name (snake_case, eg. "all_posts"): ›
```

Enter `my_todos` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which type of collection should be scaffolded? ›
❯ Global (get all entries of the selected entry types)
  By author (get entries of the selected entry types that a given author has created)
```

Use the arrow key to select `By author` and press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
? Which entry type should be collected? ›
❯ TodoItem
```
Press `<enter>`.
You should then see:

```text
Collection "my_todos" scaffolded!
```

You have now scaffolded your first Holochain hApp. To see it in action type:

```bash
npm start
```

After some compilation time you should see a browser window opened with the playground (our live Holochain state inspector) running in it, followed by two windows (opened by the `hc-launch` tool). These windows simulate two separate agents running our application.

The windows should not be very exciting yet, because we haven't edited the hApp to use the generated UI elements, but what you see on the screen should be some hints on how to proceed.

So let's follow those hints. Switch to a code editor for these steps:

1. In the code editor, open the Svelte hApp file `ui/src/App.svelte` and add two imports near the top, just below `<script lang="ts">`:

    ```typescript
    import MyTodos from './todos/todos/MyTodos.svelte';
    import CreateTodoItem from './todos/todos/CreateTodoItem.svelte';
    ```

2. Replace the "EDIT ME" text there with:

    ```html
    <CreateTodoItem></CreateTodoItem>
    <MyTodos author={client.myPubKey}></MyTodos>
    ```

Save the file, and you should see that the windows have been updated to show something that should look like this:

<img src="/assets/img/scaffolded_todos.png">

You now have a fully functional Holochain app up and running!

Next steps might include creating a collection of all to-do items, not just the ones you created, and adding a UI to see them. Enjoy and get building!

!!! learn Learn More →

- Find all the links to Rust docs, HDKs, and APIs in [References](/references/).
- Seeing strange language in these steps? Look up the words in the [Glossary](/references/glossary/).
- Go deep to understand how Holochain works in the [Core Concepts](/concepts/1_the_basics/).
!!!
